Rules of the Game
=================

.. _Rules:

Overview of the course
----------------------

In this course we explain how economic methods are used to decide
cases in competition policy and in regulatory policy. The course
consists of a sequence of lectures, active participation in class, a set of 2 (mandatory) homework
assignments and a final exam. Below, we describe the detailed contents
of each of the lectures.

For more details on the assignments, see the "Assignments" section on
Blackboard. For active participation, students should prepare the exercises that are discussed in class.

Not every lecture will start at 8:45. Check Blackboard to see at which time we start. We will also announce this in class (for the next week).

.. csv-table:: Preliminary schedule, may be updated by announcements on BB:
   :header: "day", "date", "time", "room", "topic", "exercises", "assignment due", "datacamp"
   :widths: 5, 15, 25, 15, 20, 30, 20, 70

   Wed, Feb 01, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Introduction        ,                                                                ,             ,
   Wed, Feb 08, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Python              , install python at home                                         ,             , Python Basics (Hello Python! - Variables&Types)              
   Wed, Feb 15, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Article 101         , questions 1 and 2 after lecture notes                          ,				, Basics (Variables&Types - Can Python handle everything?)     
   Wed, Feb 22, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Vertical restraints , questions 1 and 2 after lecture notes                          ,				, Python Lists (Lists what are they? - Subset and calculate)   
   Wed, Mar 08, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  no class            ,                                                                ,				, Python Lists (Subset and calculate - Inner workings of lists)
   Wed, Mar 15, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Article 102 (1)     , question 1 after lecture notes and Q and A assignment          ,             , Functions and Packages                             		   
   Wed, Mar 22, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Article 102 (2)     , questions 2 and 3 after lecture notes                          ,				, Numpy (Numpy - 2D Numpy Arrays)                              
   Wed, Mar 29, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Mergers             , question 1 at the end of lecture notes                         ,				, Numpy (2D Numpy Arrays - Blend it all together)              
   Wed, Apr 05, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Innovation          , question 1 at the end of lecture notes                         ,             ,
   Wed, Apr 12, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Q and A assignment 2,                                                                , Assignment 1,
   Wed, Apr 19, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Regulation          , question 1 at the end of lecture notes                         ,             ,
   Wed, May 03, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  no class            ,                                                                ,             ,
   Wed, May 10, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  Health care         , question 1 at the end of lecture notes and Q and A assignment 3,             ,
   Wed, May 17, 8:45-12:30,	PZ 045,  no class            ,                                                                , Assignment 2,

Assignments are due on Thursdays in the weeks indicated in the table above at 12:00 (noon).
   
Here we provide detailed contents of the lectures and the associated
literature.

-  Introduction: We provide an overview of the field and of what
   students can expect to learn during the course. We discuss the aims
   of competition policy and the instruments that competition agencies
   have at their disposal. We review some basic economic concepts
   relevant for competition policy: Consumer Surplus, Producer Surplus
   and Total Welfare; Allocative, Productive and Dynamic Efficiency. We
   also define the concept of Market Power and discuss the relationships
   between Market Power, the structure of the market and the different
   types of efficiency. *Literature*: Motta, Chapters 1,2.

-  Agreements between Firms (Article 101): Agreements between firms
   that restrict competition are forbidden, unless they are efficiency
   enhancing and are benefiting consumers. In this lecture, we provide a
   general overview of the different types of agreements. We distinguish
   between horizontal and vertical agreements and address the following
   questions: when do agreements restrict competition?, when can they be
   classified as cartels?, when are they allowed, on the basis of Article
   101.3? We also introduce collusion and why it is bad for
   consumers and for total welfare. We determine factors that facilitate
   collusion and ways for the government to discourage it. *Literature*:
   Motta, Chapter 4.

-  Vertical Agreements: Vertical agreements are agreements between firms
   that are active at different levels of the value chain, that is,
   between producers and distributors. Such agreements are treated more
   leniently than horizontal agreements. In this lecture, we describe
   different types of vertical agreements and explain why they are
   treated more leniently. We explain the double marginalization problem
   and also discuss whether or not Resale Price Maintenance (RPM) should
   be allowed. Vertical agreements can also be anti-competitive,
   especially when either the producer or the distributor has market
   power and forces exclusive contracts. We discuss concerns of
   foreclosure and the conditions under which these are justified.
   *Literature*: Motta, Chapter 6.

-  Article 102: Abuse of a dominant position (two lectures). Article 102
   forbids a firm with a dominant position to abuse that position.
   But what does it mean for a firm to have a dominant position, and
   when is behavior abusive? In this lecture we introduce these issues.
   We also distinguish between dominant positions that are permanent (in
   which case regulation is called for) and dominant positions that may
   be eroded by market forces themselves (in which case competition
   policy may suffice as an instrument). We discuss under which
   conditions the competition laws force a firm to supply inputs to its
   rivals. Further, we analyze predatory pricing and exclusive dealing.
   Finally, we discuss tying and bundling. We also discuss the various
   antitrust cases that Microsoft has been involved in. *Literature*:
   Motta, Chapter 7.

-  Horizontal Mergers: in this lecture it is explained why mergers need
   to be notified to antitrust authorities. We will discuss why and when a merger can raise concerns of
   unilateral and/or coordinated effects. *Literature*: Motta, Chapter 5.

-  Innovation: most of the lectures focus on the effects of competition
   on static efficiency. In this lecture, we analyze the effects on
   dynamic efficiency: innovation. Does more intense competition lead to
   more or to less innovation? Patents create a (temporary) monopoly
   position; is this desirable? How do we trade off the effects of this
   market power on static and dynamic efficiency?

-  Regulating a monopolist: if there is only one firm in the market,
   competition may not restrain this firm's behaviour. The government
   can then decide to regulate the firm. We introduce mechanism design
   to analyze the optimal way to regulate a monopolist.

-  Competition in health care markets: countries like the US and the
   Netherlands have private firms competing in health care markets. This
   introduces a number of competition policy issues that we will analyze
   in this lecture. For instance, should a vertical merger between an
   insurer and a hospital be allowed?

Web-lectures
------------

The competition policy lectures can be viewed on line. Each lecture page contains the links to the screencasts.

Also we use `datacamp <https://campus.datacamp.com/courses/intro-to-python-for-data-science/chapter-1-python-basics?ex=1>`_ weblectures for python.
The schedule above suggests a way to go through these lectures so that you finish them in time for your first assignment. 

In the "live" lecture, you can ask questions that you have
about the web-lecture. Hence, it is important that you watch the
web-lecture beforehand. Also the web-lecture will be useful to understand the exercises which allow you to practice for the exam. These exercises are discussed in the live lecture.

Finally, the live lecture will be used to teach python which you need for the assignments.


Home work assignments
---------------------

There will be 2 assignments. Students are allowed
to form teams to do the assignments; however, the maximum number of
students per group is 2. Students will not need to communicate the
teams. They will simply need to write two names and exam numbers on each
assignment. The TA will assume that names appearing on the same
assignment will form a group from that point onwards. Importantly,
students should stick to the same partner for both assignments. In case
of serious disagreements with the partner, students can ask the
lecturer and the TA (by email) to be allowed to do the assignments
alone from that point onwards. However, in no case they will be allowed
to form a new team with another student.


Assignments are due on Thursdays in the weeks mentioned in the schedule
above. The
deadline for submission is 12:00 on Thursdays on the weeks indicated in
the table above. One submission per team is sufficient but it should
bear the names of all team members. If we receive several files from the
members of a team, we will randomly pick one and disregard all others.
The consequence of a submission after the deadline (no matter by how
little the deadline was missed) is that the authors will receive a grade
of one (1) for the respective assignment. All members of the team are
responsible for making sure that the assignment is handed in on time. A
submission after the deadline will affect all team members equally
irrespective of who bears the fault among the team members.

Assignments will be posted on BB.

Class participation
-------------------

In class we focus on questions from previous exams. Students are
supposed to prepare the class by watching the lectures and studying
the material beforehand, including making the questions to be
discussed. We will call out student names to answer questions. What we
are looking for is that you prepared for class; not necessarily that
you give the right answer. If we believe that you prepared for class,
we give you 1 point; if you didn't prepare (or are absent from class)
when called to answer a question, you get 0. 

Your grade for partipation :math:`P` is determined as
follows. Suppose, we called your name :math:`n` times during the
semester and summing over the grades (0's and 1's) you received :math:`x`
points, then 

.. math::

   P = 25*x/n


Hence :math:`P` lies between 0 and 25.

It is your responsibility to make sure that we call out your name
during the semester (we will publish the list that we use on
Blackboard; so you can check). If :math:`n=0` for you, then
:math:`P=0` as well.


Final grade
-----------

Your final grade is the unweighted average of your participation in
class, the two assignments and the
final exam. Let :math:`P` denote the grade for your participation in
class, :math:`A_i` denote your grade on assignment :math:`i`
and :math:`E` your grade on the exam. Then the final grade :math:`F` is
determined by

.. math::

   \label{eq:1}
   F = (P+A_1+A_2+E)/4

Hence class participation and assignments are mandatory and very important!

The grades for participation and the assignments can only be used in this academic year
2016-2017. Next year a student does the whole course again including the
assignments and class participation.

For the exam, it is important that you understand things; not learn them by
heart. Therefore, at the (written) exam, you are allowed to
bring a handwritten A4 page with notes. You can write on this page
what you want: equations, law texts, poetry.

The exam is planned at T.B.A.

.. at Friday, May 27 2016. The resit at Tuesday, June 28 2016.
